# **Oracle2SQL Scenario Guide**

Welcome to the Oracle to Azure PaaS database migration.
</br>

</br>

## **Prerequsites**

- Verify your source environment is supported.
- Download [SSMA for Oracle](https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.aspx?id=54258).
- Download [Oracle Client](https://www.oracle.com/database/technologies/odac-downloads.html).
- Download [Azure Data Studio](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/azure-data-studio/download-azure-data-studio?view=sql-server-ver16).
- Obtain the [necessary permissions](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/ssma/oracle/connecting-to-oracle-database-oracletosql?view=sql-server-ver16#required-oracle-permissions) for SSMA for Oracle and [connection info](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sql/ssma/oracle/connect-to-oracle-oracletosql?view=sql-server-ver16).
</br>

</br>

## **Ora2PG**

Ora2Pg is a free tool used to migrate an Oracle database to a PostgreSQL compatible schema. It connects your Oracle database, scans it automatically and extracts its structure or data, then generates SQL scripts that you can load into your PostgreSQL database.
</br>
Ora2Pg can be used for anything from reverse engineering Oracle database to huge enterprise database migration or simply replicating some Oracle data into a PostgreSQL database. It is really easy to use and doesn't require any Oracle database knowledge other than providing the parameters needed to connect to the Oracle database.
</br>

</br>

- [Installation Document](https://ora2pg.darold.net/documentation.html#INSTALLATION)
    - [Strawberry Perl](http://strawberryperl.com/)
    - [Oracle Client](https://www.oracle.com/database/technologies/odac-downloads.html)
    - [PostgreSQL Client](https://www.postgresql.org/download/)
    - [Ora2PG](https://github.com/darold/ora2pg/releases)
    - [DBD](https://www.cpan.org/modules/by-module/DBD/)
    </br>
- [Configuration Document](https://ora2pg.darold.net/documentation.html#CONFIGURATION)
</br>

</br>

## **Discover**

The goal of the discovery phase is to identify existing data sources and details about the features that are being used. This phase helps you better understand and plan for the migration. The process involves scanning the network to identify all your organization's Oracle instances together with the version and features in use.
</br>

Microsoft pre-assessment scripts for Oracle run against the Oracle database. The pre-assessment scripts query the Oracle metadata. The scripts provide:

- A database inventory, including counts of objects by schema, type, and status.
- A rough estimate of the raw data in each schema, based on statistics.
- The size of tables in each schema.
- The number of code lines per package, function, procedure, and so on.
- To improve the performance of the assessment or export operations in the Oracle server, collect statistics:
</br>

<pre>
<code>
BEGIN

   DBMS_STATS.GATHER_SCHEMA_STATS
   DBMS_STATS.GATHER_DATABASE_STATS
   DBMS_STATS.GATHER_DICTIONARY_STATS
   END;
</code>
</pre>
</br>

</br>

## **Assessment**

To assess the migration cost, ora2pg checks all database objects, functions, and stored procedures for objects and PL/SQL code that it can't automatically convert.

The ora2pg tool has a content analysis mode that inspects the Oracle database to generate a text report. The report describes what the Oracle database contains and what can't be exported.
</br>

To activate the analysis and report mode, use the exported type SHOW_REPORT as shown in the following command:
<pre>
<code>
ora2pg -t SHOW_REPORT
</code>
</pre>
</br>

To estimate the migration cost in human-days, ora2pg allows you to use a configuration directive called ESTIMATE_COST. You can also enable this directive at a command prompt:
<pre>
<code>
ora2pg -t SHOW_REPORT --estimate_cost
</code>
</pre>
</br>

In the following code example, you see some assessment variations:

- Tables assessment
- Columns assessment
- Schema assessment that uses a default cost unit of 5 minutes
- Schema assessment that uses a cost unit of 10 minutes

<pre>
<code>
ora2pg -t SHOW_TABLE -c c:\ora2pg\ora2pg_hr.conf > c:\ts303\hr_migration\reports\tables.txt 
ora2pg -t SHOW_COLUMN -c c:\ora2pg\ora2pg_hr.conf > c:\ts303\hr_migration\reports\columns.txt
ora2pg -t SHOW_REPORT -c c:\ora2pg\ora2pg_hr.conf --dump_as_html --estimate_cost > c:\ts303\hr_migration\reports\report.html
ora2pg -t SHOW_REPORT -c c:\ora2pg\ora2pg_hr.conf –-cost_unit_value 10 --dump_as_html --estimate_cost > c:\ts303\hr_migration\reports\report2.html
</code>
</pre>
</br>

Here's the output of the schema assessment migration level:

Migration levels:

A - Migration that can be run automatically

B - Migration with code rewrite and a human-days cost up to 5 days

C - Migration with code rewrite and a human-days cost over 5 days

Technical levels:

1 = Trivial: No stored functions and no triggers

2 = Easy: No stored functions, but triggers; no manual rewriting

3 = Simple: Stored functions and/or triggers; no manual rewriting

4 = Manual: No stored functions, but triggers or views with code rewriting

5 = Difficult: Stored functions and/or triggers with code rewriting

The assessment consists of:

A letter (A or B) to specify whether the migration needs manual rewriting.

A number from 1 to 5 to indicate the technical difficulty.
</br>

</br>

## **Convert**

In minimal-downtime migrations, your migration source changes. It drifts from the target in terms of data and schema after the one-time migration. During the Data sync phase, ensure that all changes in the source are captured and applied to the target in near real time. After you verify that all changes are applied to the target, you can cut over from the source to the target environment.
</br>

In this step of the migration, the Oracle code and DDL scripts are converted or translated to PostgreSQL. The ora2pg tool exports the Oracle objects in a PostgreSQL format automatically. Some of the generated objects can't be compiled in the PostgreSQL database without manual changes.
</br>

To understand which elements need manual intervention, first compile the files generated by ora2pg against the PostgreSQL database. Check the log, and then make any necessary changes until the schema structure is compatible with PostgreSQL syntax.

</br>

### **Create a migration template**

We recommend using the migration template that ora2pg provides. When you use the options --project_base and --init_project, ora2pg creates a project template with a work tree, a configuration file, and a script to export all objects from the Oracle database. For more information, see the [ora2pg documentation](https://ora2pg.darold.net/documentation.html#Generate-a-migration-template).
</br>

Use the following command:
<pre>
<code>
ora2pg --project_base /app/migration/ --init_project test_project
</code>
</pre>
</br>

Here's the example output:
<pre>
<code>
ora2pg --project_base /app/migration/ --init_project test_project
        Creating project test_project.
        /app/migration/test_project/
                schema/
                        dblinks/
                        directories/
                        functions/
                        grants/
                        mviews/
                        packages/
                        partitions/
                        procedures/
                        sequences/
                        synonyms/
                        tables/
                        tablespaces/
                        triggers/
                        types/
                        views/
                sources/
                        functions/
                        mviews/
                        packages/
                        partitions/
                        procedures/
                        triggers/
                        types/
                        views/
                data/
                config/
                reports/

        Generating generic configuration file
        Creating script export_schema.sh to automate all exports.
        Creating script import_all.sh to automate all imports.
</code>
</pre>
The sources/ directory contains the Oracle code. The schema/ directory contains the code ported to PostgreSQL. And the reports/ directory contains the HTML reports and the migration cost assessment.
</br>
After the project structure is created, a generic config file is created. Define the Oracle database connection and the relevant config parameters in the config file. For more information about the config file, see the [ora2pg documentation](https://ora2pg.darold.net/documentation.html#Generate-a-migration-template).
</br>

</br>

### **Export Oracle Objects**

Next, export the Oracle objects as PostgreSQL objects by running the file export_schema.sh.

<pre>
<code>
cd /app/migration/mig_project
./export_schema.sh
</code>
</pre>
</br>

Run the following command manually.
<pre>
<code>
SET namespace="/app/migration/mig_project"

ora2pg -p -t DBLINK -o dblink.sql -b %namespace%/schema/dblinks -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf
ora2pg -p -t DIRECTORY -o directory.sql -b %namespace%/schema/directories -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf
ora2pg -p -t FUNCTION -o functions2.sql -b %namespace%/schema/functions -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf 
ora2pg -p -t GRANT -o grants.sql -b %namespace%/schema/grants -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf 
ora2pg -p -t MVIEW -o mview.sql -b %namespace%/schema/mviews -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf
ora2pg -p -t PACKAGE -o packages.sql -b %namespace%/schema/packages -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf
ora2pg -p -t PARTITION -o partitions.sql -b %namespace%/schema/partitions -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf
ora2pg -p -t PROCEDURE -o procs.sql -b %namespace%/schema/procedures -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf
ora2pg -p -t SEQUENCE -o sequences.sql -b %namespace%/schema/sequences -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf
ora2pg -p -t SYNONYM -o synonym.sql -b %namespace%/schema/synonyms -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf
ora2pg -p -t TABLE -o table.sql -b %namespace%/schema/tables -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf 
ora2pg -p -t TABLESPACE -o tablespaces.sql -b %namespace%/schema/tablespaces -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf
ora2pg -p -t TRIGGER -o triggers.sql -b %namespace%/schema/triggers -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf 
ora2pg -p -t TYPE -o types.sql -b %namespace%/schema/types -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf 
ora2pg -p -t VIEW -o views.sql -b %namespace%/schema/views -c %namespace%/config/ora2pg.conf
</code>
</pre>
</br>

To extract the data, use the following command.
<pre>
<code>
ora2pg -t COPY -o data.sql -b %namespace/data -c %namespace/config/ora2pg.conf
</code>
</pre>
</br>

### **Tips**

- Oracle consider char(0) as a null value and PostgreSQL doesn't accept char(0) or '' value. You need to filter those value before the migration.
- Export data by using the COPY command instead of INSERT.
- Avoid exporting tables with their foreign keys (FKs), constraints, and indexes. These elements slow down the process of importing data into PostgreSQL.
- Create materialized views by using the no data clause. Then refresh the views later.
- If possible, use unique indexes in materialized views. These indexes can speed up the refresh when you use the syntax REFRESH MATERIALIZED VIEW CONCURRENTLY.
- Please refer to the [workaround guide](./Resources/Oracle%20to%20Azure%20Database%20for%20PostgreSQL%20Migration%20Workarounds.pdf) to compare Oracle and PostgreSQL.
- [SQLines References](https://www.sqlines.com/oracle-to-postgresql#sql-language-elements)

</br>

</br>

## **Migrate**

### **Migrate Schema and Data**

When you've made the necessary fixes, a stable build of the database is ready to deploy. Run the psql import commands, pointing to the files that contain the modified code. This task compiles the database objects against the PostgreSQL database and imports the data.
</br>
In this step, you can implement a level of parallelism on importing the data.
</br>

</br>

### **Compile Files**

You can choose to load the manually generated DDL files or use the second script import_all.sh to import those files interactively.

<pre>
<code>
psql -f %namespace%\schema\sequences\sequence.sql -h server1-server.postgres.database.azure.com -p 5432 -U username@server1-server -d database -l %namespace%\ schema\sequences\create_sequences.log

psql -f %namespace%\schema\tables\table.sql -h server1-server.postgres.database.azure.com p 5432 -U username@server1-server -d database -l %namespace%\schema\tables\create_table.log
</code>
</pre>
</br>

Here's the data import command:

<pre>
<code>
psql -f %namespace%\data\table1.sql -h server1-server.postgres.database.azure.com -p 5432 -U username@server1-server -d database -l %namespace%\data\table1.log

psql -f %namespace%\data\table2.sql -h server1-server.postgres.database.azure.com -p 5432 -U username@server1-server -d database -l %namespace%\data\table2.log
</code>
</pre>
While the files are being compiled, check the logs and correct any syntax that ora2pg couldn't convert on its own.
</br>

For more information, see [Oracle to Azure Database for PostgreSQL migration workarounds](./Resources/Oracle%20to%20Azure%20Database%20for%20PostgreSQL%20Migration%20Workarounds.pdf).
</br>

</br>

### **Sync data and cut over**

In online (minimal-downtime) migrations, the migration source continues to change. It drifts from the target in terms of data and schema after the one-time migration.
</br>
During the Data sync phase, ensure that all changes in the source are captured and applied to the target in near real time. After you verify that all changes are applied, you can cut over from the source to the target environment.
</br>
In a delta/incremental migration that uses ora2pg, for each table, use a query that filters (cuts) by date, time, or another parameter. Then finish the migration by using a second query that migrates the remaining data.
</br>

</br>

## **3rd Party Solutions**

- [Qlik(Attunity)](https://www.qlik.com/us/streaming-data/data-streaming-cdc)
- [SQLines](https://www.sqlines.com/oracle-to-postgresql)
- [Striim](https://www.striim.com/)
</br>

</br>

## **References**

- [Migrate Oracle to Azure Database for PostgreSQL](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/azure/postgresql/migrate/how-to-migrate-from-oracle)
- [Data Migration Whitepapers](https://github.com/microsoft/DataMigrationTeam/tree/master/Whitepapers)
- [Oracle to Azure Database for PostgreSQL Migration Cookbook](./Resources/Oracle%20to%20Azure%20Database%20for%20PostgreSQL%20Migration%20Cookbook.pdf)
- [Oracle to Azure Database for PostgreSQL Migration Guide](./Resources/Oracle%20to%20Azure%20Database%20for%20PostgreSQL%20Migration%20Guide.pdf)
- [Steps to Install ora2pg on Windows and Linux](./Resources/Steps%20to%20Install%20ora2pg%20on%20Windows%20and%20Linux.pdf)
- [ora2pg.conf](./Resources/ora2pg.conf.pdf)
</br>

</br>
